ACM  
20 Feb 2019  
Matthew Clapp

## The Quest for Tetris

### Background

#### Conway's Game of Life

2D cellular automaton / 0-player game
* Gliders - pattern that travels diagonally
* Oscillators - Pattern repeats every N generations
* Spaceship - Moves orthogonally
* Still life - Static (same at every iteration)

Easy to create chaos; difficult to create order
* Puffer - traveling unit that leaves behind glider guns

Game of Life is Turing-complete. You can create a universal Turing machine, prime-number calculator, etc.

#### The Challenge

> Build a working game of Tetris in Conway's Game of Life

\- [Post on codegolf.stackexchange.com](https://codegolf.stackexchange.com/questions/11880/build-a-working-game-of-tetris-in-conways-game-of-life?answertab=oldest#tab-top)

##### Prior Work: Wireworld computer

Wireworld is a 2D cellular automaton, with 3 states, designed for building wires and logic.

The computer is
- OISC: transport-triggered architecture
    - ALU is built into the register bank
    - Too simple for Tetris
- Advantages:
    - Information flow is well-controlled
    - serial busses = compact (send serial pulses to represent a number instead of 16 parallel lines)
    - Makes sense: Looks like a real computer, programmed like one (not an abstract Turing machine)

#### Approach

OTCA Metapixel
- 2048x2048 period 35328 unit cell constructed by Brice Due
- It can emulate any Life-like cellular automaton
    - has 2 states and birth/death rules determined by total number of live neighbors. can't do Wireworld. Normal life rule is B3/S23 (born 
- ON and OFF cells are easy distinguish
- Different metapixels in the same pattern can be given different rules. So we can make wires.

Fundamental Theorem of Software Engineering:
> We can solve any problem by introducing an extra level of indirection

### Building Blocks

#### VarLife: Variations on Life

Tool created to simulate metapixels. Key feature: cells can be assigned different rules. [Link](http://play.starmaninnovations.com/varlife/BeeHkfCpNR)

Key rules (dead/alive colors): 
- B/S (black/white) background cels
- B1/S (blue/cyan) signal propagation
- B2/S (green/yellow) prevent backpropagation
- B12/S1 (red/orange) signal-Xing and memory

#### Wires

Each cell is actually a metapixel (2048x2048)
- Signal flows in discrete bits ("electrons")
- No backpropagation
- Can turn corners

#### Gates & Standardization

11x11 unit:
- All gates must fit cleanly within 11x11 metapixels (bounding box)
- all components send/receive in increments of 11 ticks

Serial data:
- A sequence of bits, 22 ticks appart, with the least-significant digit first

Components:
- wire crossing
- AND gate
- AND-NOT gate

#### Delays and Clocks

#### Binary Adder

### Architecture

#### Key Design Principles

- Ease of implementation
- "Massive" Tetris means we need a speedy processor and dense instruction set
- Pipeline stages have to be simple but flexible, so all operations follow identical execution steps but can carry out most important computations in a single cycle

#### Harvard Architecture with Memory-Mapping

Separation of instructions (ROM) from data (RAM)

No registers (or rather everythin is a register) - everything that can be read from/written to shares a single address space. You never need to load or store from registers, but rather

The program counter (PC) is memory-mapped to RAM address 0, so programs can perform jumps using same instructions used to edit the rest of the RAM (change the program counter itself to jump).

#### Key Functionality

Addressing modes - to control how many times a pointer is dereferenced before use.

Move-if-Not-Zero / Move-if-Less-than-Zero for control flow (for jumps; no unconditional jumps).
- "move" into a memory address
- "move" into address 0 (PC) to jump

Arithmetic: +/-

Bitwise: AND, OR, XOR, ANT (and-not aka `A & !B`)

Bitshifting: shift left, shift right logical, shift right arithmetic

Using the implementation:
- Remember we can't create bits from nothing
- Move-if-*Not*-Zero because in that case, there is a bit there that we can use to propagate some change
- Also don't have bitwise NOT because with `!0 = 1`, where would the bit come from?

#### Pipelining

1. *Fetch* current instruction from ROM
2. *Write* result of the previous instruction (if necessary) to RAM
    - creates a branch delay slot: if writing to PC, next instruction already fetched. Furthermore, you must write a number 1 less than true target
3. *Read* data for current instruction args from RAM
4. *Compute* the result (a numerical result + a 1-bit signal of whether to write)
5. *Increment* the PC

#### Asynchronous Design

Let's be fast! Reading and writing is very slow because signal has to travel all the way to furthest RAM/ROM and back; if a central clock, all r/w take same (long) amount of time. Solution: asynchronous design (no central clock); uses "sync" checkpoints so data is allowed to progress the next data in pipeline once all necessary data has arrived and all older data has left.

#### Machine code

Each word (instruction) of machine code is 58 bits wide:
```
[opcode] [mode] [data] mode data mode data
```

4-bit opcode (16 possible instr)
18-bit args x3 each of 2 bit addr mode 
16-bit data word - width so 65536 operations long; support values -32768 to + 32767
- 16 bits is enough to display a Tetris screen

#### Addressing Modes

* `00` - No RAM reads
* `01` - Direct (1 RAM read)
* `02` - Indirect (2 RAM reads)
* `03` - Double-indirect (3 RAM reads)

#### Assembly Language & Interpreter

Assembly language maps 1-1 with machine code; QFTASM (Quest For Tetris Assembly)

Compiler in Java

[Interpreter](http://play.starmaninnovations.com/qftasm/)

### Higher-Level Language: Cogol

["C of Game of Life"](https://github.com/QuestForTetris/Cogol)

Very simple language:
- IF-ELSE

### Large-Scale Architecture

* Multiplexer
    - Part gate, part wire-crossing
* ROM
    - Use Multiplexer to make ROM
* RAM (with read/write multiplexers)
* ALU
    - One path for each bitwise and arithmetic command
    - Shifts were the hardest to do 
* Read Queue: Interface to RAM (send and receive multiple read requests)
* Synchronizer: Pausing data (enables asynchronous architecture)
    - Reactivate the data stream when all the data has been gathered for an instruction

### One thing left: write Tetris

The actual display (with blocks etc.) is seen by viewing the RAM
